>> Are we living in the dream?
Let's enter the Buzzsaw.
[THEME MUSIC]
Welcome to Buzzsaw, where we
cut through the mainstream
narrative to explore
the hidden truths.
I'm your host, Sean Stone.
And with me today is
Paul Levy, a pioneer
in the field of
spiritual emergence,
as well as an innovator
in the field of dreaming.
A Tibetan Buddhist
practitioner for over 30 years,
he has intimately
studied with some
of the greatest spiritual
masters of Tibet and Burma.
He is the author of "The Madness
of George Bush, a Reflection
of Our Collective Psychosis,"
as well as "Dispelling Wetiko,
Breaking the Curse of Evil."
Today, he shares
with us his insights.
So your website is called
Awaken in the Dream, which
reminds me of the Thoreau
quote, Our truest life
is when we are in dreams awake."
So is life a dream? /
Is there any reality
that is external to our minds?
>> Yeah, well,
that's the question.
And I began having this
experience 35 years ago
that got me in a lot
of trouble at the time
because I wasn't integrated.
But I was basically
having the realization
that this is a collectively
shared dream that all of us
are creating moment by moment.
And what the problem
is is that we
don't have the
recognition of that
so we then become entranced
by that display of the dream,
and then think that it's
objective and real and separate
and solid from ourselves.
And we react to our projections
and become conditioned by them
in a way that actually traps us.
So for however many decades,
I've been trying to get out.
But yeah, no, this is like
a collectively shared dream
that once you recognize that
and stabilize that realization,
that changes everything.
And it also helps
you to get in touch
with this incredible power,
this creative power we
have to change the dream.
>> Yeah, it's almost the Nine
Inch Nails song about all
your gods, your
phantoms and your gods,
the living and the dead,
they're all in your head.
And it's essentially you're
really all alone here.
Do you think it's that?
Is it ultimately that?
Is it each one of us is really
just alone in this reality?
Or do you think that no,
actually, our aloneness
is actually a connection
to everyone else being
one, in a sense, there's
a oneness involved.
>> It's very
simplistic to say, oh,
it's all just our
own projection,
all just our imagination.
It's all just our own mind.
In the sense that
that's true, but also,
what needs to be
taken into account
is that from the
subjective point of view,
we experience whether
it's our demons or gods
from the phenomenological
point of view,
as if they actually exist.
So that needs to be, I
think, taken into account,
that subjectively we experience
them, the inner forces,
as if they actually have
an objective existence.
But ultimately speaking, there
is no intrinsic, independent--
there's nothing there
except our own imagination.
And they're both
true, even though they
seem to be contradictory.
>> So essentially, people
have, throughout history
and to the present day,
experienced aliens and demonic
entities, ghosts,
phantoms, you name it.
Right?
All kinds of
mystical experiences.
Would you say that
these are ultimately
projected from potentially
the imagination or parts
of the mind?
But what about the unconscious
aspect of our mind?
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah,
well, the unconscious,
which is so powerful--
the idea that this
being a dream.
I mean, what are dreams?
But they're direct unmediated
expressions of the unconscious.
And yeah, and the thing is,
it's like when you have a dream,
it's like this other part
of us, the unconscious,
is trying to communicate with
this other part of us that
actually is, you could say,
identified with a reference
point, with the ego.
And there is some communication
going between the two.
What the meaning of that
is that to see this being
some sort of dream is
to realize that it's
of the nature of a
symbol, that everything
is speaking symbolically.
And the thing which is
interesting about, even
etymologically,
the word "symbol,"
it means to bring
together, where
it's the antonym for
"diabolic," which is to sever
and to divide.
So the whole point
is that to deal
with the evil or the
diabolical or whatever
you would call the
darker energies, the way
to deal with it is to
recognize the dreamlike nature
and then to have that
symbolic awareness.
That actually is in the
service of our wholeness,
and to dispel the darkness.
>> Right, right, because one
of the problems I always notice
with the New Age community and
this idea of The Secret was
if you just put your mind to
something, you can attract it.
Right?
They're not accounting for the
power of the unconscious, which
I think is really what a
lot of the magic and a lot
of our reality
that we've created
is actually more projected
from the unconscious more
than our conscious.
I mean, we all
would love to live
in a happier world with
more goods and more things
and basically in peace and joy.
Right?
So it's obviously not
the conscious mind
that's creating it.
It's the unconscious that
seems to be creating it.
>> Yeah, well, getting
back to The Secret, I mean,
I'll hear people who will
be doing these affirmations
of that-- oh, whatever
the affirmation would be.
And I hear the opposite
of what they're
saying because
they're saying that
as this reaction with reference
to dealing with the darkness.
And the thing about
these darker forces,
which are the shadow, the
archetypal personal shadow that
are all part of us, is that
if we don't add consciousness
to the shadow, then
we're unwittingly
empowering the very
thing that we're avoiding
and not wanting to look at.
>> So you talk about essentially
confronting the shadow,
being conscious of the shadows.
And that's oftentimes
what I find
about people who are so
logical and analytical
and certain about the
nature of reality.
It's almost as though,
this is the way things are.
Science says it's this way.
And I'm certain of that.
It's as though they're really
denying a tremendous aspect
of their own mind, which is the
shadow side, which is almost
the Heisenberg paradox,
where you can never
be certain of both the speed and
the location of the particle.
We can't be certain of reality.
Even in this very
moment, it's shifting.
So the reality that people
speak of, oftentimes, it's
as though they're trying
to basically create
a paradigm within
they have to live.
But eventually,
trauma always occurs.
Chaos always occurs.
Tragedy always occurs
when people are not
ready to basically
embrace the shadow
elements, the demons,
the dark side that
is innate to this existence.
>> Yeah, I come across that all
the time with people who are
just overly identified
with the light.
And they're so terrified
of the darkness
that they don't even want to put
any of their attention on it.
But by them having the
reactivity and that being
in avoidance of the
darkness, like I was saying,
they're unwittingly feeding it.
And the whole point
is that who are we?
We're like a hologram, like
a full spectrum hologram
that includes all
the colors from dark
to light and
everything in between.
And if any part of that
we don't deal with,
then we're feeding that.
And it'll manifest
in a negative way.
That's guaranteed.
>> Right, right.
And obviously, you wrote
your book on George Bush.
And basically, he's a reflection
of our collective psychosis.
And I'm sure, looking
at the Trump phenomenon,
I mean, obviously, it's
not to say he's all bad,
but he oftentimes reflects
language that is fear-based,
that is bigoted.
Do you see this uprising,
as what's occurring now,
as almost like our darkest
shadows are, in a sense,
being projected
on the big screen.
And this is not just Trump.
This is a global thing
with fear of Islam,
global war, conflict with
Russia, China, you name it.
I mean, does it feel
like we are basically
looking at this collective
expression of the shadow?
>> Yeah, well, one
way to understand it,
from my point of view, is when
you see this as being like
a dream--
when you have a dream and
you don't get the message,
what happens?
Then you have a recurring dream,
and not only a recurring dream,
but it tends to be more
amplified up until you actually
get the message.
So there is deep darkness
that's manifesting in our world.
But the point I want to make
is that from the dreaming point
of view, it's clear that here
is this incredible darkness,
but it's not hiding in the
corners or underground.
It's fully visible.
It's out.
And that's an expression.
When there is such
intense darkness,
that's an expression that
there is light nearby
that's casting the shadow.
And so it's potentially,
like in quantum speak,
a real opportunity if we
have the recognition what's
being shown to us.
But if we don't have that
recognition, then guaranteed,
we're going to be
compelled to just continue
to destroy ourselves because
we're actually committing,
collectively, a form of
suicide as a species.
>> Now, so this gets into the
question of what is the wetiko,
because obviously, you delve
into this issue of is there
almost a mind parasite, or
a curse upon mankind that is
keeping us in this position
of constant unconsciousness,
lack of reflection, inability
to break from the past,
the past traumas, to basically
heal and mend and move forward.
Is that what it boils down to?
>> Yeah, yeah.
And just to create context, how
I first came upon the wetiko
energy was in my family.
My father was a really sick man.
And I'm the only child that--
I'm not going to
go into the story.
But he acted out
his darkness onto me
and onto a lot of people,
but I was the main recipient.
But the thing which
caught my attention
was that the whole field--
the family system, the
mental health community--
they all configured to
protect the darkness,
to protect my father.
And the whole while, I was
tracking this and realizing,
wow, there's a
deeper process here.
It's almost like
there's a field that's
becoming visible through
what was playing out
in my family system.
And then I began to
realize, oh, that's exactly
what's happening in the greater
body politic of our world.
And yeah, it's such a helpful
idea, the wetiko psychosis.
It's a collective psychosis.
It's an indigenous term.
And it really connotes
the spirit of real evil.
And yet, like I point
out in my book again
and again, encoded in
wetiko, in the evil,
is actually it has a blessing.
It's actually helping
us to wake up.
But if we don't have
the recognition of what
it's showing us, like
I was saying before,
then we're just
going to continue
to be compelled to
destroy ourselves,
which is what we're doing.
>> So tell me about what is
the actual origin of the wetiko
as a concept?
>> Yeah, well, keep in mind,
so it's a Native American term,
but it's in every
spiritual tradition,
and not only in
spiritual traditions,
but even so many of these
creative artists are pointing
at it in their own creative way.
And the point is is that
just experientially,
there's something in us--
and the origin of the
wetiko is the psyche.
It's not external.
It's not like any sort of
external parasite or something
like that.
No, no, no.
The origin of it
is inside of us.
And it's like an energy that's
actually kind of adversarial,
in this adversarial way with
reference to our own light,
with reference to
our own creativity.
>> The self-destructive
force in us then.
>> Yeah, yeah, and there's
such a fine line between being
creative and being
self-destructive.
If we don't express
you we are creatively,
it turns back in
a self-destructive
or other destructive way.
And so the indigenous people,
they coined the term "wetiko."
But I'm not even
attached to that.
There's a zillion terms.
Every spiritual tradition
has their particular name
or a symbol system for it.
But it's really pointing at that
there is something in us that
seems to be some form of
obscuration or obstacle
towards us actually
fulfilling our full potential.
And the thing I'm pointing
at is that instead
of that just being, oh,
that's a negative thing.
No, no, no, when you look
at the deeper process,
it's actually in service of
our evolution as a species.
If wetiko didn't exist, we
would have to invent it.
OK?
It's that important.
>> But is it something that you
think is almost part of human
blood in the sense of our
DNA, our genetic memory?
There is this whole
theory, psychology,
that basically we're carrying
a lot of the psychoses,
a lot of the traumas, a lot
of the pains and memories
of our ancestors in our DNA.
Is that linked to to the
power and the charge?
>> Right, right.
That's very much
one aspect of it,
about how unresolved
trauma gets passed down
through the generations, through
the ancestry and all that.
And of course, if I
haven't healed my trauma,
what's going to happen?
I'm going unconsciously
act it out and transmit it
to my kids or my
partner or whatever.
That's the way it
begins to propagate.
And there are all these theories
about, oh, these negative ETs,
or we have this collective
trauma so many years ago
as a species.
And I'm open to that.
I have no idea.
But all that I know is
that in the present moment,
we, ourselves, are complicit in
each moment in either creating
wetiko or actually
dispelling it.
So what I'm pointing at
is that the present moment
is the portal through which
we can get our hands actually
into it, in a way, to dispel it.
>> Right, because you mentioned
about your own family and this
dealing with addiction
and how, in a sense,
people become addicted
to their addictions.
And it becomes a pattern.
And the idea is we create
bad patterns in the--
>> It becomes a
self-perpetuating feedback
loop.
And I mean, just think about
whether we're in trauma
or have an addiction, when
we're in trauma, the way
that I'm trying to heal my
trauma is actually creating
the very trauma that
I'm trying to heal
from in a self-generated
feedback loop.
And that's insanity.
>> Well, the idea,
we've been bombed,
so we're going to
go and bomb back.
It's a never-ending
cycle of violence.
>> Yeah, it's just going
to create more terrorists.
It's pouring fuel on the fire.
Exactly.
And to the extent
that we're asleep,
we don't recognize that.
So what I'm pointing
at with my work
is that there's a
higher dimension
in which the third dimension
is enfolded within.
And if we're just focused
on what's actually
happening physically
in the third dimension,
we're actually, in a sense,
being hypnotized by the display
without seeing.
And I just want to
point out-- so I just
wrote this book on
physics, quantum physics,
as a dreaming process.
And one of the main insights
of quantum physics--
I mean, there are a
whole bunch of them--
is that physicists, up until
the discovery of the quantum,
in studying physical
reality, it was
like they were studying these--
they were in Plato's cave and
they were studying the shadows
on the wall, thinking it was
reality, without realizing
what's casting the shadow.
And that's what I'm
pointing at, that there
is a higher dimension
whose origin is the psyche,
is inside of us.
So if I can say one more
amazing thing about wetiko,
it's an inner
disease of the soul.
It's a psychospiritual disease
of the soul that actually
explicates itself through the
medium of the outside world
in a synchronistic way.
And that's amazing.
So if you just think
about that for a moment.
It's something inside of
us that's actually somehow
able to configure events in the
world in a synchronistic way
so as to reflect back what's
going on inside of us.
Now, to the extent
that we don't see that,
we then react to
our projections,
thinking it's objective
and separate and all that.
And then we just
are fueling wetiko.
But if we actually had the
recognition-- oh, what's
actually happening out
there is symbolically
reflecting something
in us, that's
when we begin to recognize
the dream-like nature
and to awaken.
>> We have A question
from one of our viewers.
Zephyr from Nebraska asks
if you consider humans,
in the words of Graham Hancock,
"a species with amnesia?"
And I think this is an
important question because we're
talking about the
fact that we've
been so trapped
by our addictions
and our reactive state,
it's as though we've
forgotten as humans--
we've forgotten to learn from
our past mistakes and traumas
to basically grow beyond it.
Do you think we are a
species with amnesia?
>> Yeah, in my
quantum physics book,
one of the chapters is called
"Geniuses with Amnesia,"
that our nature is that
we're these geniuses,
but we've forgotten.
And from the shamanic point
of view, in other words,
all of our different parts
have been dismembered,
and what we need to do is
to remember who we are.
And the point it is that we
can actually help each other
to do that.
Now, if I could just say one--
because I'm so
interested in trying
to get across this
whole idea of wetiko
because it's so profound.
So on the one hand, it's
a form of being blind.
It's a psychic blindness.
But it's a particular
form of psychic blindness
that, actually, it
believes that it's sighted.
But not only does it
believe that it's sighted,
but it believes it's
more sighted than people
who are actually seeing.
>> So it's the one eye.
In the spiritual
traditions, they
say the one eye is the devil.
But essentially, it
could be the one eye
that assumes that it's seeing
with both eyes, or even--
>> That's interesting.
>> --mistakes the left eye
for the third eye in a sense.
>> Right, right, right,
that's really interesting. .
And so the thing is
what wetiko does,
it somehow inspires us
to put our attention
outside of ourselves and think
the problem is out there.
And then it feeds off
of being polarized.
If we're like, oh,
Muslims are bad,
or Donald Trump is
this, or whatever,
by having a polarized
point of view,
then we're feeding
wetiko, and it's actually
inspiring the polarization.
But if you actually
have the recognition
that we're having
a dream right now,
well, then who is Donald
Trump, for example?
He's a dream character, which
means he's a reflection.
It's exactly what
I tried to write
about in the book about the
madness of Bush is that yeah,
we think of him as separate.
Oh, then we're feeding wetiko.
But if we actually
have the recognition--
oh, no, he's reflecting
this part of us,
however we would
characterize it,
then we're beginning to wake
up and to dispel wetiko.
But the thing I wanted
to really get across,
going back to this
being a dream,
say, if you're actually
in a night dream,
and you hold a
particular perspective
in that night dream.
Well, what is the night dream?
It's your own mind.
It's just like a reflection,
projection of your own mind.
So if I hold the perception,
the dream, it just has no choice
but to reflect back whatever
viewpoint I'm holding.
But if I change my
perspective, instantaneously--
not in one second or half a
second, in no time at all--
the dream will shape shift
and reflect back my change
in perspective.
So if I'm holding a particular
perspective in a dream,
then the dream will
supply all the evidence
to prove to me the
seeming objective
truth of that viewpoint.
Now, I have all the
evidence so that I
can get even more entrenched,
and that's actually
objectively true.
And the more I
hold that, the more
it reflects back
the objective truth.
That's the feedback loop.
It's plugging into our
own incredible brilliance
and talent for creating reality.
And we're turning it
against ourselves.
>> Right.
It certainly fits
into my perspective
of humanity, which is
that we are each creators,
and that if we don't tap into
that creativity within us,
we self-destruct.
And that's, I think,
a big issue that we
face throughout human
history is the fact
that we've stifled
that creative impulse
and replaced it with
the logical, mundane,
almost you could say
roboticized reality that we have
to live through, as opposed
to the creative, inspired,
exciting adventure that reality
can be when we're creative.
So in terms of the time
period, because we're
seeing such a
bipolarity, do you think
that what we're having
to face is essentially
the consequence of full
bipolarity, is ultimately,
a unity that will be
after this darkness?
What is coming?
What is man working towards?
>> Yeah, it all depends.
In quantum style,
it's potentially that.
It's an incredible
opportunity for us
to get to a higher
place of integration
if we recognize what's
actually happening.
Now, just going back to the
thing about quantum physics,
one of the major insights
of quantum physics--
I mean, they've
empirically shown,
without the slightest
shadow of a doubt,
that there's no such
thing as objective reality
that's in any way having any
separation from the observer.
So the idea is that through
our act of observing reality,
we're invoking the reality
that we're observing.
And what the
implication of that is
is that we are creative beings.
We're creator beings.
But we've disconnected
from that part.
And by having that split and
not being fully congruent
with being this
creative being, that
opens the doorway
for wetiko, then,
to plug in to our own
creativity because it
has no creativity at all--
>> It's a parasite, essentially.
>> Yeah, it's a parasite
of the mind though.
Don't think of it as a physical,
third-dimensional parasite.
But it's actually a higher
dimensional parasite
whose origin is inside of us.
And actually, ultimately,
it's helping us.
Like I've been
trying to say, it's
this incredible
force for evolution.
But if we don't recognize
that, then we're
just going to destroy ourselves.
>> In a sense, the parasite
makes you stronger.
Right?
Because by being able
to expel it ultimately,
now you've hit a new evolution
within your mind consciousness.
>> And it's not
just expelling it.
It's also from the
alchemical point of view,
being able to transmute
that negative,
that evil into medicine.
The thing about wetiko,
it's a quantum phenomena
in that it's the source
of the deepest evil
that our species
enacts on each other,
and it's the most incredible
medicine and blessing
that we could ever imagine.
But like in quantum
physics, well,
is light going to manifest
as a wave or a particle?
It depends on how we observe it.
That's the same thing.
>> Sure, the transmutation.
From the dung, the
plants, the food grows.
Do you think that
there was a time
that humans lived more in right
balance with their environment,
with nature?
I mean, obviously, the age
of the pyramid builders,
I'm thinking of,
for example, there's
indication there was more
of a flow in a sense of how
we understood our
reality as being--
they called it bicameral
mind when the god
spoke to us, for example.
>> Right.
And I would imagine
that that's true,
that there was a time
in the past like that.
But also, I imagine, that maybe
that our species back then
didn't have the full
capacity we have
of language or consciousness.
So it's easy to adjust
in an idealized way
to think, oh, yeah, way
back when, everybody was
living in harmony with nature.
Well, that might be true to
some degree or full degree.
But also, there's
a shadow element
that they hadn't really
developed consciousness
to the extent that
maybe we have right now.
>> And this is
what's playing out.
Obviously, the
shadows of the past
are what's playing
out in our present.
But from the shadows,
from the darkness,
we can create a new
reality going forward.
>> Yeah, yeah.
Well, the thing
about the darkness,
just from the psychological
point of view--
think about it.
In one person's process--
if I go to my analyst and
there's this incredible shadow
that I'm dealing with, one
aspect might be personal,
but another aspect might be
archetypal-- in other words,
having to do with
the collective.
And just from a
psychological point of view,
oh, yeah, that shadow,
that's the source
of this incredible individuation
that can come out of it.
And I just would love
to ask the question
whether that's a parallel,
whether that same thing is true
collectively,
whether in a species
or in a society, where there
is such incredible shadow
that's actually taking form in
the greater body politic right
now, whether encoded in that
is this incredible potentiality
for a deeper awakening.
And I kind of feel that
that's really true.
>> So based on your work,
based on your research,
how do you advise people
to dispel the wetiko?
How do they embrace
and individuate
with that shadow side?
>> Yeah, why don't you
ask me some easy question?
And that is the question.
And there are a number of things
that I'll try to point out.
So on the one hand,
one of the ways wetiko
works-- so say we'll
see the evil out there
in whatever form, whoever it
is or whatever is playing out.
And what typically happens,
because it's not just
out there, but it's also
interfacing with our psyche--
we'll get triggered.
We'll have a reaction.
So right there is a doorway.
Instead of focusing our
attention outside of ourselves,
which then, we're not fully
in connection with ourselves,
but to actually self-reflect.
It's an incredible
opportunity to inquire
into what inside of us at that
moment is being triggered.
So that would be one thing.
Second thing is in
any way any of us
could access being creative
because the thing about wetiko,
it's an archetypal energy.
And if we don't actually
constructively, consciously,
creatively express it,
like we've been saying,
it turns self-destructive.
And so the idea is any form
of art or creative expression,
incredibly, not only helps,
but it empowers ourselves.
Because the thing
about wetiko, you see,
it can't stand to be seen.
So like I was saying,
it's a form of blindness.
And so it operates
through our projections,
through the projective
tendencies of our mind.
And so the unconscious has these
spots that are blind spots.
And so it operates
through the blind spots.
So it operates through us.
We become the instrument
through which it incarnates.
And simultaneously, it hides
itself from being seen.
So to actually see
how that's happening,
that also dispels wetiko.
>> Shining a mirror
on it, basically,
turning the mirror on it
to see itself in a sense?
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah well,
the mirror, etymologically,
it means "the holder
of the shadow."
So it's interesting.
When you see it out
there, if you still
become, like I was
saying, entranced
by it being outside
of us, then we're
feeling wetiko through
that very viewpoint.
But if we have the
recognition-- oh,
what I'm seeing actually
has to do with me--
And then I guess
one other thought
is any way we're
able to really tap
into compassion, to
real, genuine compassion,
because compassion is an
expression of actually having
the recognition of the dreamlike
nature, which means that we're
characters in each other's
dreams, which means that we're
not separate, that we're
actually interconnected,
interdependent.
And the energetic expression of
that realization is compassion.
>> Yeah, that's beautifully put.
I think your right.
I mean, compassion, mercy,
these are the tools basically
by which we can actually start
to reconcile and ultimately
overcome the traumas of the
past that really have locked us
into these patterns
that you point out,
that wetiko feeds on.
>> I told the other thing
about the trauma of the past.
So the thing about wetiko,
it's a collective psychosis
that's actually acting itself
out all over the world.
And it freaks me out that
very few people are even
talking about that.
We're in the middle of
a collective psychosis.
But I want to compliment
that by saying,
and our species is in trauma.
We're all suffering from PTSD.
But encoded-- like the
other thing, because I've
learned this so much from
what happened with my father
because I was deeply
traumatized by him acting out
his unhealed abuse onto me.
And so in a way, it made
me an expert on trauma
because I was so
completely traumatized.
And I'm still a
work in progress.
But the thing which
is so interesting
is that in trauma, there is
the compulsion to repeat.
And the repulsion to
repeat is actually
recreating the very trauma
we are trying to heal,
from like I was saying.
But also, encoded
in that impulse
to compulsively
repeat the trauma,
we're actually trying
to unlock something.
We're actually trying
to discharge something
or to integrate something.
>> Right.
Exactly.
Paul, thank you so much for
coming on and joining me today.
I really appreciate your time.
>> Oh, it's totally my pleasure.
Thank you so much, Sean.
>> Thank you.
There you have it, folks,
fascinating insights
from Paul Levy.
You don't have to
agree with or believe
everything said here today.
So I urge you to check out his
website, awakeninthedream.com.
It's online and has
plenty of details
and more information
about his work.
Remember, the road to
truth is a perilous path,
one on the buzz saw's edge.
It requires constant
reassessment.
I'm your host, Sean Stone.
You are the revolution.
[THEME MUSIC]